doc/website/blog: v0.15 announcement (#2206)
ariga/atlas: doc/website/blog/2023-10-19-atlas-v-0-15.mdx

---

> title: "Announcing v0.15: Interactive Declarative Migrations, Functions, and Stored Procedures"
> authors: rotemtam
> tags: [announcement, atlas, declarative, functions, stored-procedures]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Announcing v0.15: Interactive Declarative Migrations, Functions, Procedures and Domains"
authors: rotemtam
tags: [announcement, atlas, declarative, functions, stored-procedures]
```

---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Hi everyone!

It's been a few weeks since our last version announcement and today I'm happy to share with you  

> [v0.15](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/releases/tag/v0.14.0), which includes some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[v0.15](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/releases/tag/v0.15.0), which includes some
```

> [v0.15](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/releases/tag/v0.14.0), which includes some

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[v0.15](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/releases/tag/v0.15.0), which includes some
```

very exciting improvements for Atlas:

* **Interactive Declarative Migrations** - Atlas supports a Terraform-like workflow for managing your database schema
  using the `schema apply` command. In this release we have added a new "Lint and Edit" mode to this command, which

>   will analyze your schema changes for issues and allow you to edit them interactively before applying them to your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  will analyze your schema changes for issues and will allow you to edit them interactively before applying them to your
```

  database.
* **Functions and Stored Procedures** - Atlas now supports creating and managing functions and stored procedures in
  your database schema.
* **Postgres Domains** - In addition, Atlas now supports [Postgres Domains](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/16/sql-createdomain.html)

>   as well. A domain is essentially a data type with optional constraints (restrictions on the allowed set of values).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. A domain is essentially a data type with optional constraints (restrictions on the allowed set of values).
```

* **TypeORM Integration** - TypeORM is a popular ORM for Node.js. In this release, we are happy to announce the TypeORM
  integration, which allows you to automatically generate your database schema from your TypeORM entities, create visualizations
  and more.

Let's dive right in!

### Interactive Declarative Migrations

Atlas supports a Terraform-like workflow for managing your database schema using the `schema apply` command.
This workflow, which we call "Declarative Migrations", is a modern alternative to the traditional "versioned migrations"
workflow. In declarative migrations, you define your desired schema in one of the formats supported by Atlas and supply
a connection string to your database. Atlas compares the current and desired schema of your database and generates a

> migration plan to bring your database to the desired state.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
plan to migrate your database to the desired state.
```

Reviewer: Rotem's version feels more clear to me.

Similar to Terraform, until today, Atlas would prompt you to confirm the migration plan before applying it to your
database. This is a great way to ensure that you don't accidentally apply a migration that you didn't intend to. However,
this flow suffers from a few drawbacks:

1. *Ensuring Safety* - you can count on Atlas to generate a *correct* migration plan to your desired state,
   but it's still possible that this migration will have unintended side effects. For example, adding a `UNIQUE`
   constraint to a column might fail if there are duplicate values in the column.
2. *Editing* - users often want to make changes to their migration plan before applying it. In the current flow, this
   requires running `schema apply` with the `--dry-run` flag, saving the output to a file, editing it, and then manually
   applying the edited migration plan to the database.

#### Enter: Interactive Declarative Migrations

> In this release, we are introducing a new "Lint and Edit" mode to the `schema apply` command. This mode is

Reviewer 4: Feels repetitive and reading flow disruptive the way it is currently after the new heading.

> In this release, we are introducing a new "Lint and Edit" mode to the `schema apply` command. This mode is

Reviewer 3: Disagree :/ I would keep this sentence

available to logged-in users only, as it uses Atlas Cloud to provide a neat UI and rich analysis capabilities.
Let's see it in action.

Start by downloading the latest version of Atlas:

```
curl -sSf https://atlasgo.sh | sh
```

> For installation instructions on other platforms, see the [installation guide](https://atlasgo.io/getting-started#installation).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For more in-depth installation instructions, see the [installation guide](https://atlasgo.io/getting-started#installation).
```

Author: The point is to let people know that other platforms exist

After installing Atlas, make sure to log in using the `atlas login` command:

```
atlas login
```

Next, create a new file named `schema.hcl` that will contain your desired schema:

```hcl title="schema.hcl"
schema "main" {
}

table "hello" {
  schema = schema.main
  column "name" {
    type = varchar(100)
    default = "Anonymous"
  }
}
```

Now, let's apply this schema to a local SQLite database named "sqlite.db":

```

> atlas schema apply -u sqlite://sqlite.db -f schema.hcl

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
atlas schema apply -u "sqlite://sqlite.db" -f schema.hcl
```

```
Atlas will calculate the diff between the current (empty) state of the database and
our desired state and prompt us to confirm the migration plan:

```text
-- Planned Changes:
-- Create "hello" table
CREATE TABLE `hello` (`name` varchar NOT NULL DEFAULT 'Anonymous');
Use the arrow keys to navigate: ↓ ↑ → ←
? Are you sure?:
    Apply
// highlight-next-line
  ▸ Lint and edit # <-- Brand new!
    Abort
```

Notice the new "Lint and edit" option. Select it and press Enter. Atlas will now analyze the migration plan and

> open your browser in the new, interactive migration plan screen. Notice the screen contains three important sections:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
open your browser in the new, interactive migration plan screen. The screen contains three important sections:
```

* **Migration Plan** - the migration plan generated by Atlas. You can click the "Edit" button to make changes to it.
* **Checks** - a summary of the checks that Atlas ran against the generated plan. In this case, our plan is completely
safe, so all checks passed.
* **ERD** - A visual representation of the change we are planning.

> ![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/blog/v0.15/interactive-plan.png)

Reviewer 4: Does not exist

> ![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/blog/v0.15/interactive-erd.png)

Reviewer: The links in these images are wrong.

Once we are content with the migration plan, let's go ahead and click the "Approve and Apply" button. Atlas will
apply the migration plan to the database and scroll down to the execution logs section:

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/blog/v0.15/interactive-logs.png)

> Let's now edit our desired state a bit to delete the `hello` table and add a new `users` table:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's edit our desired state a bit to delete the `hello` table and add a new `users` table:
```

```diff title="schema.hcl"
schema "main" {
}
-table "hello" {
-  schema = schema.main
-  column "name" {
-    type = varchar(100)
-    default = "Anonymous"
-  }
-}
+table "users" {
+  schema = schema.main
+  column "id" {
+    type = int
+  }
+  column "email" {
+    type = text
+  }
+  primary_key {
+    columns = [column.id]
+  }
+  index "unique_email" {
+    columns = [
+      column.email
+    ]
+    unique = true
+  }
+}
```

Once again, let's run `atlas schema apply` to apply the changes to the database and select the "Lint and Edit" option.

This time, Atlas will warn us that the migration plan is not safe:

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/blog/v0.15/interactive-destructive.png)

In this case, we decide to abort the migration in order to not lose the precious data on the
`hello` table. Good thing we have automatic migration linting on our side!

### Functions and Stored Procedures

> Over the past few months, we have received numerous requests to support management of [Functions](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions.html)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Over the past few months, we have received numerous requests to support management of [functions](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions.html)
```

and [stored procedures](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createprocedure.html) in popular databases such as

> [PostgreSQL](https://postgresql.org) and [MySQL](https://mysql.com).  Functions and stored procedures are a way to encapsulate

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[PostgreSQL](https://postgresql.org) and [MySQL](https://mysql.com). Functions and stored procedures are a way to encapsulate
```

              END
          );
          SET i = i + 1;
      END WHILE;

      RETURN output_text;
  END
  SQL
  deterministic = true
}
schema "default" {
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sql" label="SQL">

```sql title="schema.sql"
DELIMITER //

CREATE FUNCTION leet_speak(input_text VARCHAR(255))
RETURNS VARCHAR(255)
DETERMINISTIC
BEGIN
    DECLARE output_text VARCHAR(255) DEFAULT '';
    DECLARE i INT DEFAULT 1;

    WHILE i <= LENGTH(input_text) DO
        SET output_text = CONCAT(output_text,
            CASE SUBSTRING(input_text, i, 1)
                WHEN 'a' THEN '4'
                WHEN 'e' THEN '3'
                WHEN 'i' THEN '1'
                WHEN 'o' THEN '0'
                WHEN 's' THEN '5'
                WHEN 't' THEN '7'
                ELSE SUBSTRING(input_text, i, 1)
            END
        );
        SET i = i + 1;
    END WHILE;

    RETURN output_text;
END;
//
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

For the purpose of this demo, we will run a local MySQL Docker container:

```
docker run --rm -d --name atlas-demo -p 3306:3306 -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=pass -e MYSQL_DATABASE=default mysql:8
```

Now, let's apply our schema to the database:

```

> atlas schema apply -u mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/default -f schema.hcl

Reviewer: ```suggestion
atlas schema apply -u mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/default --to file://schema.hcl
```

? Are you sure?:
  ▸ Apply
    Abort
```

Let's go ahead and select the "Apply" option. Atlas will apply the migration plan to the database and print the
following output:

```text
✔ Apply
```

We can now verify that the function was created successfully by running:

```
docker exec -it atlas-demo mysql -uroot -ppass -D default -e "SELECT leet_speak('hello leet world');"
```

And the result indeed is:

```text
+--------------------------------+
| leet_speak('hello leet world') |
+--------------------------------+
| h3ll0 l337 w0rld               |
+--------------------------------+
```

To learn more about functions and stored procedures in Atlas, check out the [documentation](https://atlasgo.io/atlas-schema/hcl#function).

### Postgres Domains

Another highly requested feature was support for [Postgres Domains](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/16/sql-createdomain.html).
A domain is essentially a data type with optional constraints (restrictions on the allowed set of values). For example,
you might want to define an `email_address` domain which would be a `varchar` column with a `CHECK` constraint to ensure
that the value is a valid email address.

> Starting v0.15, Atlas can now manage domains in your database schema, as well as use them as types for table columns.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting with v0.15, Atlas can now manage domains in your database schema, as well as use them as types for table columns.
```

with a `CHECK` constraint to ensure that the value is at least 4 characters long. We then define a `users` table that
uses these domains for its columns.

Let's see what happens when we apply this schema to a local Postgres database:

```
atlas schema apply -u 'postgres://postgres:pass@localhost:5432/postgres?sslmode=disable' -f schema.hcl
```

Atlas calculates the diff between the current (empty) state of the database and
our desired state and prompts us to confirm the migration plan:

```text
-- Planned Changes:
-- Create domain type "us_postal_code"
CREATE DOMAIN "public"."us_postal_code" AS text CONSTRAINT "us_postal_code_check" CHECK ((VALUE ~ '^\d{5}$'::text) OR (VALUE ~ '^\d{5}-\d{4}$'::text));
-- Create domain type "username"
CREATE DOMAIN "public"."username" AS text DEFAULT 'anonymous' NOT NULL CONSTRAINT "username_length" CHECK (length(VALUE) > 3);
-- Create "users" table
CREATE TABLE "public"."users" ("name" "public"."username" NOT NULL, "zip" "public"."us_postal_code" NOT NULL);
Use the arrow keys to navigate: ↓ ↑ → ←
? Are you sure?:
  ▸ Apply
    Abort
```

After applying, let's re-run the `schema apply` command to make sure that the schema is up-to-date:

```text

> atlas schema apply -u 'postgres://postgres:pass@localhost:5432/postgres?sslmode=disable' -f schema.hcl

Reviewer: ```suggestion
atlas schema apply -u 'postgres://postgres:pass@localhost:5432/postgres?sslmode=disable' --to file://schema.hcl
```

```
Indeed, Atlas reports that the schema is up-to-date:

```text
Schema is synced, no changes to be made
```

### Support for TypeORM

[TypeORM](https://typeorm.io/) is a popular ORM for Node.js. In this release, we are happy to announce the TypeORM
integration, which allows you to automatically generate your database schema from your TypeORM entities, create visualizations,
and more.

The [TypeORM Atlas Provider](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-typeorm) is a Node.js module that can extract

> the desired schema of your database directly from your TypeORM entities. To use it, first install it:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the desired schema of your database directly from your TypeORM entities. To use it, first install:
```
